NoSQL	(GITHUB)
Nosql nedir
İlişkisiz veritabanıdır. NoSQL is not a relational database.
Bir NoSQL veritabanında, kayıtlar genellikle bir JSON belgesi olarak saklanır.
Why NoSQL? It's high performance with high availability, and offers rich query language and easy scalability.

NoSQL (ilişkisel olmayan) Veritabanları Nasıl Çalışır?
NoSQL veritabanları, verilere erişmek ve verileri yönetmek için belge, grafik, anahtar-değer, bellek içi ve arama dahil olmak üzere çeşitli veri modelleri kullanır. Bu tür veritabanları, özellikle büyük veri hacmi, düşük gecikme süresi ve esnek veri modelleri gerektiren uygulamalar için optimize edilmiştir. Bu gereksinimler, diğer veritabanlarının veri tutarlılığı kısıtlamalarının bir kısmı esnetilerek karşılanır.
NoSQL is a whole new way of thinking about a database. NoSQL is not a relational database. The reality is that a relational database model may not be the best solution for all situations. The easiest way to think of NoSQL, is that of a database which does not adhering to the traditional relational database management system (RDMS) structure. Sometimes you will also see it revered to as 'not only SQL'.

Imagine that you have coupons that you wanted to push to mobile customers that purchase a specific item. This is a customer facing system of engagement requires location data, purchase data, wallet data, and so on. You want to engage the mobile customer in real-time.

What you require is a very agile delivery system that is easily able to processes unstructured data. The system of engagement would need to be extremely dynamic. 

Basit bir kitap veritabanının şemasını modelleme örneğini ele alalım:
•	İlişkisel bir veritabanında genellikle bir kitap kaydı gizlenerek (veya “normalleştirilerek”) ayrı tablolarda depolanırken, ilişkiler birincil ve yabancı anahtar kısıtlamaları tarafından tanımlanır. Bu örnekte Books (Kitaplar) tablosu ISBN, Book Title (Kitap Başlığı) ve Edition Number (Baskı Sayısı) sütunlarına; Authors (Yazarlar) tablosu AuthorID (Yazar Kimliği) ve Author Name (Yazar Adı) sütunlarına; Author-ISBN (Yazar-ISBN) tablosu ise AuthorID (Yazar Kimliği) ve ISBN sütunlarına sahiptir. İlişkisel model, veritabanının yedekliliği azaltacak şekilde normalleştirilmiş ve genel olarak depolama için optimize edilmiş tablolar arasında başvurusal bütünlük uygulamasına imkan tanıyacak şekilde tasarlanmıştır.
•	Bir NoSQL veritabanında, kitap kaydı genellikle bir JSON belgesi olarak saklanır. Her kitap için öğe, ISBN, Book Title (Kitap Başlığı), Edition Number (Baskı Sayısı), Author Name (Yazar Adı) ve AuthorID (Yazar Kimliği) bilgileri tek bir belgede öznitelikler olarak depolanır. Bu modelde, veriler sezgisel yazılım geliştirme ve yatay ölçeklenebilirlik için optimize edilir.

Neden NoSQL veritabanı kullanmalısınız?
NoSQL veritabanları, harika kullanıcı deneyimleri sunulması amacıyla esnek, ölçeklenebilir, yüksek performanslı ve yüksek oranda işlevsel veritabanları gerektiren mobil, web ve oyun gibi birçok modern uygulama için idealdir.
•	Esneklik: NoSQL genellikle daha hızlı ve daha fazla yinelemeli yazılım geliştirmeyi mümkün kılan esnek şemalar sağlar. Esnek veri modeli sayesinde NoSQL veritabanları yarı yapılandırılmış ve yapılandırılmamış veriler için idealdir.
•	Ölçeklenebilirlik: NoSQL veritabanları genellikle pahalı ve kalıcı sunucular eklenerek ölçeği artırılabilecek şekilde değil, dağıtılmış donanım kümeleri kullanılarak ölçeği genişletilebilecek şekilde tasarlanır. Bazı bulut sağlayıcıları bu işlemleri arka planda, tam olarak yönetilen bir hizmet olarak gerçekleştirir.
•	Yüksek performans: NoSQL veritabanları, benzer işlevlerin ilişkisel veritabanlarıyla gerçekleştirilmesi ile karşılaştırıldığında daha yüksek performansı mümkün kılan belirli veri modelleri (belge, anahtar-değer, grafik gibi) ve erişim desenleri için optimize edilmiştir.
•	Yüksek oranda işlevsel: NoSQL veritabanları, her biri ilgili veri modeli için özel olarak tasarlanmış yüksek oranda işlevsel API'ler ve veri türleri sağlar.
-
-
-
-
-
-
MongoDb		(GITHUB)
Mongodb nedir
Bir veritabanı uygulamasıdır, ilişkisiz veritabanıdır -> MongoDB is a general purpose, document-based, distributed database built for modern application developers and for the cloud era. No database makes you more productive.

MongoDB (“humongous”); MongoDB Inc. tarafından ölçeklenebilir, doküman tabanlı, C++ ile geliştirilmiş açık kaynak, NoSQL (ilişkisiz veritabanı) veritabanı uygulamasıdır. MongoDB, verileri JSON tipinde dokümanlarda saklamaktadır, anlamsal alanları dokümandan dokümana değişir ve veri yapısı zaman içinde değiştirilebilir. Belge modeli, uygulamanızın kodundaki nesnelerle eşleştirilir, böylece verilerin kullanımı kolaylaşır. Geçici sorgular, dizin oluşturmak için ve gerçek zamanlı verilerinize erişmek ve analiz etmek için güçlü yollar sağlar. MongoDB, özellikle hız gerektiren ve geleneksel ilişkisel veritabanlarının (RDBMS) hantal ve yavaş kaldığı yapılarda kullanılmaktadır.MongoDB, dağıtılmış bir veritabanı yapısına sahiptir, bu nedenle yüksek erişilebilirlik, yatayda ve dikeyde ölçeklendirme yapılabilmektedir. MongoDB, GNU Affero Genel Kamu Lisansı uyarınca yayınlanan ücretsiz ve açık kaynaktır.
Örnek kullanım alanları arasında:
•	Yüksek hacim/içerikli problemler
•	Analiz için veri saklanması
•	MMORPG uygulamaları
•	Caching sistemleri
•	Web içerik yönetim sistemleri
•	Web yorum/etiket saklama ve yönetme
İkililer, Windows, Mac OS X, Linux ve Solaris için mevcuttur.
-
-
-
-
-
-
Difference between scaling horizontally and vertically for databases		(GITHUB)

Horizontal scaling nedir, vertical scaling nedir

Horizontal scaling means that you scale by adding more machines into your pool of resources whereas Vertical scaling means that you scale by adding more power (CPU, RAM) to an existing machine.
An easy way to remember this is to think of a machine on a server rack, we add more machines across the horizontal direction and add more resources to a machine in the vertical direction.
                   
In a database world horizontal-scaling is often based on the partitioning of the data i.e. each node contains only part of the data, in vertical-scaling the data resides on a single node and scaling is done through multi-core i.e. spreading the load between the CPU and RAM resources of that machine.
With horizontal-scaling it is often easier to scale dynamically by adding more machines into the existing pool - Vertical-scaling is often limited to the capacity of a single machine, scaling beyond that capacity often involves downtime and comes with an upper limit.
Good examples of horizontal scaling are Cassandra, MongoDB, Google Cloud Spanner .. and a good example of vertical scaling is MySQL - Amazon RDS (The cloud version of MySQL). It provides an easy way to scale vertically by switching from small to bigger machines. This process often involves downtime.
In-Memory Data Grids such as GigaSpaces XAP, Coherence etc.. are often optimized for both horizontal and vertical scaling simply because they're not bound to disk. Horizontal-scaling through partitioning and vertical-scaling through multi-core support.
-
-
-
-
-
-
Distributed database / DDBMS
Distributed database nedir? DDBMS nedir (distributed database management system)
A distributed database is a database that consists of two or more files located in different sites either on the same network or on entirely different networks. Portions of the database are stored in multiple physical locations and processing is distributed among multiple database nodes.
Önemli notlar: 
Distributed databases are capable of modular development, meaning that systems can be expanded by adding new computers and local data to the new site and connecting them to the distributed system without interruption.
When failures occur in centralized databases, the system comes to a complete stop. When a component fails in distributed database systems, however, the system will continue to function at reduced performance until the error is fixed.
Admins can achieve lower communication costs for distributed database systems if the data is located close to where it is used the most. This is not possible in centralized systems.
-not bitiş
Kısa açıklama:
A distributed database is a database in which not all storage devices are attached to a common processor.[1] It may be stored in multiple computers, located in the same physical location; or may be dispersed over a network of interconnected computers. Unlike parallel systems, in which the processors are tightly coupled and constitute a single database system, a distributed database system consists of loosely coupled sites that share no physical components.

A centralized distributed database management system (DDBMS) integrates data logically so it can be managed as if it were all stored in the same location. The DDBMS synchronizes all the data periodically and ensures that data updates and deletes performed at one location will be automatically reflected in the data stored elsewhere.
By contrast, a centralized database consists of a single database file located at one site using a single network.
When in a collection, distributed databases are logically interrelated with each other, and they often represent a single logical database. With distributed databases, data is physically stored across multiple sites and independently managed. The processors on each site are connected by a network, and they don't have any multiprocessing configuration.
A common misconception is that a distributed database is a loosely connected file system. In reality, it's much more complicated than that. Distributed databases incorporate transaction processing, but are not synonymous with transaction processing systems.
In general, distributed databases include the following features:
•	Location independent
•	Distributed query processing
•	Distributed transaction management
•	Hardware independent
•	Operating system independent
•	Network independent
•	Transaction transparency
•	DBMS independent
Distributed database architecture
(homogenous distributed database system nedir, heterogeneous distributed database nedir)
Distributed databases can be homogenous or heterogeneous.
In a homogenous distributed database system, all the physical locations have the same underlying hardware and run the same operating systems and database applications. Homogenous distributed database systems appear to the user as a single system, and they can be much easier to design and manage. For a distributed database system to be homogenous, the data structures at each location must be either identical or compatible. The database application used at each location must also be either identical or compatible.

Features of a distributed database
In a heterogeneous distributed database, the hardware, operating systems or database applications may be different at each location. Different sites may use different schemas and software, although a difference in schema can make query and transaction processing difficult.
Different nodes may have different hardware, software and data structure, or they may be in locations that are not compatible. Users at one location may be able to read data at another location but not upload or alter it. Heterogeneous distributed databases are often difficult to use, making them economically infeasible for many businesses.
Types of distributed databases
Replicated data is used to create instances of data in different parts of the database. By using replicated data, distributed databases can access identical data locally, thus avoiding traffic. Replicated data can be divided into two categories: read-only and writable data.
Read-only versions of replicated data allow revisions only to the first instance; subsequent enterprise data replications are then adjusted. Writable data can be altered, but the first instance is immediately changed.
Horizontally fragmented data involves the use of primary keys that refer to one record in the database. Horizontal fragmentation is usually reserved for situations in which business locations only need to access the database pertaining to their specific branch.
Vertically fragmented data involves using copies of primary keys that are available within each section of the database and are accessible to each branch. Vertically fragmented data is utilized when the branch of a business and the central location interact with the same accounts in different ways.
-
-
-
-
-
-
Database Management System - DBMS
Dbms nedir
DBMS: The software which is used to manage database is called Database Management System (DBMS). For Example, MySQL, Oracle etc. are popular commercial DBMS used in different applications. DBMS allows users the following tasks:
Data Definition: It helps in creation, modification and removal of definitions that define the organization of data in database.
Data Updation: It helps in insertion, modification and deletion of the actual data in the database.
Data Retrieval: It helps in retrieval of data from the database which can be used by applications for various purposes.
User Administration: It helps in registering and monitoring users, enforcing data security, monitoring performance, maintaining data integrity, dealing with concurrency control and recovering information corrupted by unexpected failure.
Introduction of DBMS (Database Management System) | Set 1
Important Terminology

Database: Database is a collection of inter-related data which helps in efficient retrieval, insertion and deletion of data from database and organizes the data in the form of tables, views, schemas, reports etc. For Example, university database organizes the data about students, faculty, and admin staff etc. which helps in efficient retrieval, insertion and deletion of data from it.

DDL is short name of Data Definition Language, which deals with database schemas and descriptions, of how the data should reside in the database.

CREATE: to create a database and its objects like (table, index, views, store procedure, function, and triggers)
ALTER: alters the structure of the existing database
DROP: delete objects from the database
(truncate nedir)
TRUNCATE: remove all records from a table, including all spaces allocated for the records are removed
COMMENT: add comments to the data dictionary
RENAME: rename an object
DML is short name of Data Manipulation Language which deals with data manipulation and includes most common SQL statements such SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, etc., and it is used to store, modify, retrieve, delete and update data in a database.

SELECT: retrieve data from a database
INSERT: insert data into a table
UPDATE: updates existing data within a table
DELETE: Delete all records from a database table
MERGE: UPSERT operation (insert or update)
CALL: call a PL/SQL or Java subprogram
EXPLAIN PLAN: interpretation of the data access path
LOCK TABLE: concurrency Control
Database Management System: The software which is used to manage database is called Database Management System (DBMS). For Example, MySQL, Oracle etc. are popular commercial DBMS used in different applications. DBMS allows users the following tasks:

Data Definition: It helps in creation, modification and removal of definitions that define the organization of data in database.

Data Updation: It helps in insertion, modification and deletion of the actual data in the database.

Data Retrieval: It helps in retrieval of data from the database which can be used by applications for various purposes.

User Administration: It helps in registering and monitoring users, enforcing data security, monitoring performance, maintaining data integrity, dealing with concurrency control and recovering information corrupted by unexpected failure.

Paradigm Shift from File System to DBMS

 File System manages data using files in hard disk. Users are allowed to create, delete, and update the files according to their requirement. Let us consider the example of file based University Management System. Data of students is available to their respective Departments, Academics Section, Result Section, Accounts Section, Hostel Office etc. Some of the data is common for all sections like Roll No, Name, Father Name, Address and Phone number of students but some data is available to a particular section only like Hostel allotment number which is a part of hostel office. Let us discuss the issues with this system:

Redundancy of data: Data is said to be redundant if same data is copied at many places. If a student wants to change Phone number, he has to get it updated at various sections. Similarly, old records must be deleted from all sections representing that student.
Inconsistency of Data: Data is said to be inconsistent if multiple copies of same data does not match with each other. If Phone number is different in Accounts Section and Academics Section, it will be inconsistent. Inconsistency may be because of typing errors or not updating all copies of same data.
Difficult Data Access: A user should know the exact location of file to access data, so the process is very cumbersome and tedious. If user wants to search student hostel allotment number of a student from 10000 unsorted students’ records, how difficult it can be.
Unauthorized Access: File System may lead to unauthorized access to data. If a student gets access to file having his marks, he can change it in unauthorized way.
No Concurrent Access: The access of same data by multiple users at same time is known as concurrency. File system does not allow concurrency as data can be accessed by only one user at a time.
No Backup and Recovery: File system does not incorporate any backup and recovery of data if a file is lost or corrupted.
These are the main reasons which made a shift from file system to DBMS.
-
-
-
-
-
-
Access Modifiers
Access modifier nedir, public nedir, private nedir, protected nedir, internal nedir
All types and type members have an accessibility level, which controls whether they can be used from other code in your assembly or other assemblies. You can use the following access modifiers to specify the accessibility of a type or member when you declare it:
public

The type or member can be accessed by any other code in the same assembly or another assembly that references it.
private

The type or member can be accessed only by code in the same class or struct.
protected

The type or member can be accessed only by code in the same class, or in a class that is derived from that class.

internal

The type or member can be accessed by any code in the same assembly, but not from another assembly.
protected internal 

The type or member can be accessed by any code in the assembly in which it is declared, or from within a derived class in another assembly.
private protected 

The type or member can be accessed only within its declaring assembly, by code in the same class or in a type that is derived from that class.

The following examples demonstrate how to specify access modifiers on a type and member:
public class Bicycle
{
    public void Pedal() { }
}
Not all access modifiers can be used by all types or members in all contexts, and in some cases the accessibility of a type member is constrained by the accessibility of its containing type. The following sections provide more details about accessibility.
Nested Classes
Nested class nedir, nested classes nedir
When one class is entirely dependent upon another, you may decide to implement it using a nested class. Nested classes are declared within the scope of an existing class and receive special benefits when they access their parent class's members.


What are Nested Classes?
A nested class is a special type of class that can be created using C#. Normally classes are declared within a namespace, or in the default namespace if one is not specified. A nested class is defined within the code block of another class, which itself may be a nested class to permit multiple nesting levels.


A nested class generally behaves is the same way as any other class. It can be instantiated separately to its parent class and is not instantiated automatically by its parent. However, there are some important differences. One key difference concerns the scope of the class. Normally classes can be either public or internal. A nested class may be declared as private, meaning that the class can only be seen by its parent class and other nested classes within that parent. A nested class may also be declared as protected, allowing it to also be accessed by classes that derive from its parent type. This may be extended to protected internal to allow other classes in the same assembly to access it.

Nested classes are given special access to instances of their parent classes. When an object of a parent class is passed to a method of a nested class, the method is permitted to access the private and protected members of the object. This makes nested classes ideal where a special relationship exists with the parent class that requires access to private members, particularly when the nested class is not required anywhere else and is never used in a standalone capability.


